Do you have a minute? We make a podcast
called The Daily.
>> Sure.
>> We're in town looking at all of the
renovations and construction work that
presidents have undertaken, the
reflecting pool, Lafayette Park, and the
arch that's going to be built behind us.
And we're just trying to figure out what
people are thinking about it.
>> I think it's a mess.
I really I'm really disappointed because
we're here for my granddaughter's 16th
birthday. She wanted to come to D.C.,
see all the stuff, and I really thought
that pool would be finished. [music]
>> Um I'm very sad that this year our trip
they're renovating the pool because um
all the other years before they saw very
nice views from the pool. And we
Can I
>> From The New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro.
>> What's up, guys?
>> What do you think about the reflecting
pool?
>> We think that it should be open
[laughter] for
>> This is The Daily.
In the lead-up [music] to America's
250th birthday this summer,
President Trump is spending hundreds of
millions of dollars on a massive
renovation of the nation's capital.
>> I think it's good. I mean, they're
fixing it up, making it look pretty. I
mean, this is Washington, D.C.
Everyone's going to come here.
>> And depending on where you sit,
these projects [music] are either boldly
slicing through bureaucratic red tape to
bring Washington back to its glory.
>> Love him. I 100% behind him. He's making
this wonderful D.C. look greatly
beautiful again.
>> All right, tell us about your the arch.
>> The arch, 100% behind the arch as well.
>> Or
>> I think when things are done, why change
them?
And then change them again.
It was made that way for a reason. Why
change it?
>> [music]
>> They are blowing through every single
rule and regulation designed to [music]
protect taxpayer dollars
and safeguard the historical integrity
of the city.
>> I I don't like any of it. I believe it's
all about his ego and not about our
country. And so for me that doesn't
work.
>> So today,
>> [music]
>> we're taking a walking tour of the sites
that Trump is remaking with our
colleague David [music] Fahrenthold, who
has been investigating exactly how these
projects have come together and what
they will mean for the country's most
iconic public spaces. [music]
It's Monday, June 1st.
>> Hey.
>> Hello David, what's going on, man?
>> Pleasure.
>> You too.
>> Our tour guide has arrived.
>> you guys?
>> Welcome to DC.
>> Thank you so much. Thank you for being
our tour guide today.
>> So our plan
if you sign on to it
>> Yes.
>> is for you to take us
to
the biggest construction sites
across the mall. We're going to start
where we're standing in front of
Lafayette Park in downtown Washington,
DC.
Literally a stone's throw from the White
House. Then we're going to go to the
reflecting pool and we're going to end
with the arch.
But
your reporting, as best I can tell on
all this, starts right here in Lafayette
Park.
>> So just
tell us that story.
>> So I cover government contracts. I write
about how the government spends its
money and the way that it chooses the
people it pays.
President Trump in his second term has
been obsessed and very ambitious about
changing Washington, renovating,
repairing, improving the physical
surroundings of downtown Washington, the
place where he works. And those projects
are happening all over and I was really
interested in seeing how those projects
came together. What were those contracts
like? Who was getting paid? How were
they getting paid and how did they get
selected?
>> Mhm.
>> And my curiosity led me to this one
particular, the renovation of Lafayette
Park particularly
because of what I found in government
contracting records, or more precisely
what I didn't find. The contract to fix
this park is secret.
It doesn't exist in any of the public
databases of government spending.
>> That's unusual.
>> Yes, very unusual for something like
this. Like, we're not building a missile
launch site. This is not a bunker.
There seemed to be no reason why it
would be secret.
And then when we did get a copy of that
contract, the story we pieced together
was even more interesting.
Now, what needs to happen in Lafayette
Park is fairly simple. There's a couple
of fountains built in in the 1960s that
don't work. And after talking to many,
many people about Washington fountains,
I've come to the personal belief that
fountains are just a demonstration of
man's hubris, the belief that we can
[laughter] harness and conquer nature,
and we're always proven wrong. Fountains
always break.
>> And just to say like, it's a big
fountain that's right right in front of
us. It looks like, I don't know, maybe
300, 400 square feet across.
>> It's not the Bellagio, but it is a
pretty big fountain. There's two
fountains, each of them has sort of two
spray rings as they call them, and they
don't work. They haven't worked for a
few years. So, the job was to just
repair those so the water can start
flowing again.
It's not top secret. It's not
particularly hard. It's something that
happens in the government all the time.
But, what we found was that the contract
was given out on a no-bid basis. So, the
government selected a contractor without
going through the legally required
process of comparing offers and figuring
out who could do the best job for the
least money.
>> Right, which is what
most people think of is just best
practice, whether you're having a tree
taken down in your yard or a deck built
on your house, you ask two, three, if
you're really ambitious, four companies
to tell you what they're going to charge
you.
>> Right. When it's your money, that seems
obvious, right? And the reason these
laws exist is because the government is
not spending its own money. They have to
Yeah, they have to make sure that the
government follows these procedures so
that they're getting the same good deal
for us the taxpayers that we would try
to get for ourselves if it was our air
conditioner that broke or our plumbing
or our fountain or whatever.
>> Right. And what's the administration's
rationale for giving this contract out
with zero bidding process.
>> Well, they've cited an exemption that
does exist in the law for urgent
situations. These are times when there's
no time to seek other bids because
there's some sort of emergency going on,
often in natural disasters or wartime.
They've cited that as a reason not to
seek other bids and just go with this
bid here. And the urgency in this case
is not a war, obviously, or a natural
disaster, but just that the president
wants this done by July 4th.
>> For the 250th.
>> Right. But remember,
the 250th anniversary of the country has
been on the calendar for 250 years.
[laughter]
And also, the Trump administration
started talking about this and caring
about this last spring. So, it's not
like this deadline, July 4th, 2026,
appeared out of the first time out of
nowhere in the beginning of this year.
It's something that had been on their
calendar from the beginning.
>> And David, once you figure out what's
inside of this contract, what do you
come to understand about how much this
one bidding company is charging we the
taxpayers for these fountains?
>> Right now, this contract is worth $17
million. And what we were able to tell
by looking inside the government's
contracting records was that the
original estimate the government had
gotten from this job. It had reached out
in the Biden era to an independent
estimator to get a sense of how much it
ought to cost was about 3, 4 million
dollars.
>> Wow.
>> And you could tell by looking in the
records that the Trump administration
had gone into that and pumped that
figure up in a couple of ways that
contracting officials told us was odd.
>> Such as?
>> Well, they counted inflation twice. They
increased it for inflation and then
increased it again for inflation.
>> I want to count inflation twice.
>> Right, exactly. If I'm selling a home,
I'm definitely going to do that.
>> And $17 million, in the grand scheme of
federal funding,
is not a ton of money, just to be clear,
right? It's like half of a wing of a
fighter plane.
>> Right.
>> How are we to really think about why
that number
is a big deal?
>> It's not a lot of money in the context
of the federal government, but it is
really emblematic of something that we
have seen all over Washington, and in
some places all over the federal
government, which is the Trump
administration is bypassing the
competitive process that is set up in
the law to make sure taxpayers get the
best deal and handing out contracts
without competition, often to companies
that have some sort of connection to the
president or his administration.
>> Okay, well, since you raised it, what
should we know about the company that
got this no-bid contract on the
fountains?
>> The company that got these contracts is
called Clark Construction. It's a really
large company based in Maryland. It's
done government contracts for 100 years.
>> Yeah, I've seen their flags flying over
buildings in New York City.
>> Right. It's It's This is a big company,
but they are in a special relationship
with Trump because they are the ones
building his White House ballroom.
>> Mhm.
>> And the White House ballroom is not like
other federal projects. We don't know
how much it's going to cost. Trump has
said 400 million, but we don't really
know.
>> He's also said he may need an additional
1 billion for security underneath that
he would like the taxpayers to fund.
>> Exactly, right. He said it's going to
come from all private donations, but
then he's also asked for a billion
dollars from Congress. And we don't
really know how much Clark is going to
make off of this, right? Trump has
actually said publicly that Clark is not
going to be paid at all. He said that
Clark has offered to do this ballroom
project for free.
We don't think that's true, but it's
clear that they have taken on this
special relationship on a big project
with it seems like uncertain dimensions
and also uncertain funding sources, all
putting themselves in the good graces of
Trump for now.
>> So, perhaps a cynic would wonder
is the fountain project with its
potentially inflated costs
a thing you give a company doing you a
favor?
>> Right. There certainly are people that
see it that way. Clark told us they did
everything above board. There's nothing
sort of wrong about the way they handled
this project, but certainly they are
getting paid a lot more than the
government originally thought they
should get paid for this project and the
details of those payments, if we hadn't
reported them, would be totally secret.
>> You can kind of see the logic if you're
the president. Clark's already working
on my ballroom on the White House
property.
I have something else for them to do
across the street. Just take care of
that.
>> You're right. There is logic and that
was one of the things they cited was
that Clark was already staging its
equipment nearby and so it would be
easier for them. There's also a concern
about security clearance. Clark has
security clearance to work inside the
White House grounds and sometimes
Lafayette Park is closed off for
diplomatic events and effectively
becomes part of the White House security
perimeter.
And it's important to know that like the
White House does have sort of special
rules for building within the White
House grounds, but we are here in the
real world right outside the White House
fence where all the normal laws are
supposed to apply. So, what we're seeing
is that the approach President Trump has
taken to the ballroom, which is like
let's keep everything secret, you know,
let's pick people that the president
handpicks is now sort of like bleeding
outside the White House grounds into the
real world and this is the first example
of it.
>> In other words, what the president's
doing with the ballroom, that's in its
own category. It's the White House, it's
the president, a lot of it is, we're
told, private funds.
But once we get into Lafayette Park,
we're in a whole other world.
Tax dollars, public space, and a legal
process that's supposed to apply that's
being disregarded and treated as if this
is all just an extension of the White
House.
>> That's right.
>> So, with all that backstory, how's the
work actually going? Is it going fast?
Is it going to be ready?
>> It does seem to be going fast. The work
has expanded into a few other things in
the park including some benches and
landscaping, but the heart of it is
still the fountains. And the fountains,
we are told they've tested them, they
flow, they're on track to be ready, the
government says, for July 4th. And as we
look at them right now, there's still
some sort of blue painter's tape around
the outside. It seems like the work is
still going on.
>> Right.
But when it is ready, I think it's fair
to say it's going to be beautiful. This
is a very prime location directly in
front of the White House and to have two
highly functioning rings of water will
probably make this a lovely destination
for tourists, for nearby office workers.
The New York Times bureau's is there. I
I could see myself coming here and
having a sandwich.
>> It would certainly will be beautiful.
And it's important to know that there
are broken fountains, or there were
broken fountains and Park Service
properties all over DC. And President
Trump has made those things a priority
in a way that no previous presidents
had. He's used Park Service funding that
was meant to serve the whole country to
renovate those fountains. So, there are
fountains all over Washington, including
some that probably the president will
never see in neighborhoods that are used
by Washingtonians that are flowing now
for the first time in a long time.
>> Mhm.
>> Because of what President Trump did.
>> Which is, I think inarguably, a good
thing. Fountains that actually
fountain.
>> [laughter]
>> Uh yes.
>> And as we know,
this is really the starting point. This
is, so to speak, where the president is
getting his feet wet.
And
I think that brings us to our next
location,
which is the Reflecting Pool.
>> Right. A much bigger project and a much
bigger pool.
>> So, let's take the very long walk from
here to the Reflecting Pool.
Let's go.
>> [music]
>> Uh what's the fastest way to get there?
>> We got to get over this way and then
it's a little bit left in here, so let's
go over to 17th Street.
>> Okay.
All right.
So, we're just being paused in front of
a security gate outside the White House
where a
black SUV is going in.
>> Uh I think this is the um preparations
for the UFC fight.
>> What's that?
>> I think this is the preparations for the
UFC fight.
>> As we get a little bit closer to the
Reflecting Pool, I just wanted to
observe
some of the sight lines that we can see
because they feel so central to how this
place
works. The Washington Monument's in
front of us, behind it the Capitol Dome,
and if you turn around, you can look
directly into the Lincoln Memorial. And
these things exist clearly in a in a
line that's super intentional.
>> That's right. And so much of the city is
engineered that way. Even the heights of
the buildings, the widths of the
avenues, making sure that when you're at
one landmark you can see another and
that you sort of get that message that
these, you know, the branches of
government, the parts of our history are
linked together.
>> Right.
>> In a country that changes this much and
is so focused on progress, Washington is
frozen and changes so slowly to provide
that kind of reminder, right? We're
reminded both of the origins of our
government, but also like of the history
that created that country. And we're
not, you know, we don't change that even
small details of that without really,
really thinking about it. All right.
With that, let's walk through the World
War II Memorial to the Reflecting Pool.
We'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> Okay, so now that we are at Reflecting
Pool
and before we talk about this
construction work which you can
literally hear and there's a
metal gate being locked in front of us.
Just remind us about the place of this
Reflecting Pool
on the Mall and its place in the larger
Washington D.C. mythology.
>> So, the Reflecting Pool was built in the
'20s along with the Lincoln Memorial and
the point of it is to amplify both the
Lincoln Memorial at one end and the
Washington Monument at the other. So,
you stand at one, you look across and
you see a mirror image of the other
great monument. You see sort of them
double. And it was designed to be
invisible in that way. You don't look at
the pool to see the pool, you look at it
to see a reflection of both the
monuments around it and also the sort of
history-making events that have happened
along the sides of it.
>> Right, which are many.
>> Which are many. And people may know the
a fictionalized one which is the scene
in Forrest Gump where Jenny jumps into
the pool to see Forrest.
>> Uh, but there also have been many famous
real events going back to the 1960s, the
I Have a Dream speech by Martin Luther
King, some huge protests against the
>> Million Man March?
>> Million Man March in the 1990s,
gatherings of the left and the right.
President Trump counts it as the scene
of one of his great events after his
election in 2016. So, just think about
how many Americans, we're seeing them
around us today, have come here, stood
at this place, looked out at this
reflecting pool and thought, you know,
I'm standing in the place where history
happened.
But, of course, the reflecting pool of
film and American lore is not what we
are looking at
right now. No, we're standing in front
of a construction site. The reflecting
pool is empty of water. Instead, it has
a semi-truck, lots of trailers,
generators, a lot of construction
equipment. There's sandbags and
>> Porta Potties.
>> four Porta Potties, barrels of supplies.
We're looking at a very large
construction site here.
>> So, talk us through the construction
that's happening here and how it fits
into the larger reporting project you've
been up to.
>> Well, the project we're seeing in front
of us is another example of the Trump
administration bypassing the usual
competitive bidding process and just
handing an important contract directly
to one company.
>> Okay.
And what is that company?
>> Company's called Atlantic Industrial
Coatings. It's a small company based in
a place called New Canton, Virginia.
Oddly, President Trump told the story
several times of how this company was
hired. He said, "I realized that it was
actually just a giant swimming pool. I
talked to the swimming pool guys from my
golf clubs. I picked the guy who'd done
a great job at my golf club in Northern
Virginia, and I called him and they said
I said, "Can you take care of it?" He
said, "Great, you know, I can handle
it."
>> But, a pool's a pool.
>> "A pool's a pool, and we'll do it like a
pool." And that was what President Trump
said several times in public.
It turns out that's not true. As far as
I can tell, this company advertises no
experience doing swimming pools. Their
experience is in things like coding
highway culverts, fuel tanks,
waterproofing things, but not swimming
pools. And I also don't think they've
ever worked for the Trump organization.
And now Trump himself has said as much.
He said, "I don't know this company, and
they never worked for me."
Raising again the question of how they
got this job.
It's odd that this company, uh, which
doesn't have any advertising experience
doing even small swimming pools, would
be entrusted by the government without
any sort of competitive bidding process,
but that is what happened.
>> And this is this company's first time
doing work for the federal government.
>> their first ever federal contract.
>> Wow, it's a pretty big stage to make a
debut on.
>> It is. That's right.
>> And what is the scope of work that this
company is undertaking here to get this
thing fully functioning by the 250th
anniversary?
>> Well, we could see that work in front of
us. So, one of the things they're doing
is spreading a waterproofing compound on
the 8-in thick concrete slabs. They're
also filling in the gaps or trying to
fill in the gaps between the concrete
slabs.
>> supposed to address the leaks.
>> Okay.
>> To understand though why that was such a
risk, I think you need to know a little
bit more about why the pool has been
troublesome and why it needs repair.
>> Okay.
>> The pool has three main problems.
The water leaks out between the concrete
slabs.
There are pipes that connect the pool to
its filtration system, which is behind
us here a few hundred yards away. Those
pipes often break and leak, which means
they have to shut everything down or
else the water just leaks out into the
ground. And then at the filtration site,
there's also a need for a better filter
because algae blooms makes the water
green and matted and ugly and actually
makes it impossible to reflect in some
cases. So, lots of administrations have
tried over the years to fix those
problems. So, President Trump in his
first term started thinking about how do
I fix the problems of the reflecting
pool. And what we're seeing now is that
in his second term he is actually trying
to make those repairs happen.
Here's what's odd about what the Trump
administration is doing. They are doing
two of the three things that needed to
be done before.
They're trying to fix the leaky joints
between the concrete slabs. Another
contract, not by done by this company,
is putting [music] a new filtration
system in. But, they're not doing one
key piece, which is fixing the pipes
that connect the pool with that
filtration system. And if those don't
get fixed and they continue to leak,
then the algae problem could recur
because you're not getting the water to
the place where it's cleaned.
>> And why wouldn't you just
fix this root to stem, fix the pipes,
permanently restore this pool?
>> It's a great question. That was the plan
starting in the first Trump
administration through Biden. The plan
was to do all three of those things.
Seal the pool, fix the pipes, fix the
filtration. Somewhere this year the fix
the pipes thing got put on the shelf.
They say now they might do it in the
fall, um but it's not happening now. And
until that gets done, well people we've
talked to said it's not a permanent fix.
And we see in Park Service documents
that the Park Service says,
you know, our own people didn't come up
with this plan to fix the pool. The
person who came up with it is a guy
named David S, an administration
advisor.
>> Hm.
>> Who is David S? If you look in other
documents related to this contract, you
see that a guy named David
Schutzenhofer, who's the general manager
of Trump's golf course in Bedminster,
New Jersey, was advising the Park
Service on this job, was helping connect
them with other vendors. Uh we don't
know for sure that he is the same David
S, but you see that the origins of this
whole idea, the whole plan for fixing
this pool, have come from outside the
Park Service. And it was an idea they
hadn't even considered before. So, that
gives you a sense of how kind of out of
the box this solution is.
>> What is the price tag
that this company is charging all of us
to do this work?
>> It's charging right now $14.1 million.
That is notable because it's also
different than President Trump first
described. He originally said this
contract would cost $1.8 million. It's
now obviously seven times that.
>> Okay. And do we know why?
>> The this contract is is as large as it
is in part because the company is
charging 20% for overhead and then 20%
more for profit. Now, we've seen Park
Service documents that show that even
within the Park Service, people believe
that those two percentages, 20% and 20%,
were excessive and inflated. The Park
Service is paying them anyway, in part
because they're on a very quick
timeline. The government wanted this
work done so badly that it actually told
them to start work before they agreed on
a price tag. And so, that means that
later on when they came to haggle over
the final price, the pool was already
partly underway. The government has very
little leverage to come back then and
say, "Hey, listen, we're not going to
pay the full price." Like, you know,
would they really threaten to kick them
off, you know, with the work partly
done?
>> Right. And with everyone understanding
that the president wants to get this
thing ready for 250th, which means we
really only have a couple months left.
>> The original due date for this project
was May 22nd.
Now President Trump is saying the real
deadline is July 4th.
>> Right. Which I think brings me to the
final issue with the reflecting pool,
which is the president's selection of a
very specific shade of blue, which I am
looking at, and I just want to ask you
about it.
>> Well, a lot of the pool's bottom is
painted a dark shade of blue. President
Trump said that he had originally wanted
it to be turquoise, like the Bahamas,
but that the contractor that he had
hired for this told him that that it
should be American flag blue. And so,
American flag blue is what they've
settled on.
>> Kind of a deep navy blue.
>> Yeah, it's a dark kind of blue, dark
blue jean blue.
That is the color now of most of the
pool. It will be the the final color of
the entire pool. And the question is,
what will it look like when it is
filled? People that I've talked to,
landscape architecture experts, say that
it probably will not affect the
reflectivity. What matter What makes it
reflective is that it's shallow and it's
dark, and it will still have both of
those elements.
>> So, in the end, when it comes to the
reflecting pool, we have a project
that's not going to solve what may be
all the big underlying problems. And
because the administration granted this
to a single company and didn't put it
out for any competitive bidding process,
we don't know if somebody might have
come along and said, "Actually, I can do
it for less than 13 million." We'll
never know that because of the way that
this contract was awarded.
>> That's right. This case really embodies
the risks of no bid contracts, right?
Without knowing what other people would
charge, without knowing how other people
would have attacked these same problems,
it's really hard to know if what they
have here is the right solution, the
best solution, the cheapest solution.
It's impossible to evaluate what else
could have been done. We only know what
they have.
All right, David, we have one last stop
on this tour and that is the arch.
That's right, we're now going to walk
west to the Lincoln Memorial to look
across the Potomac River at the future
site of the triumphal arch.
>> arch. The United States
triumphal arch.
>> Cool.
>> It's less blue than I thought it was
going to be. I guess that I thought that
they would
Look, there's the Lincoln Memorial right
over there.
This is by far my favorite.
I think it's everyone's favorite.
>> Yeah, mine as well.
>> Monument on the mall?
Cuz there's something spectacular about
going into his little home.
>> Right, it is grand and also intimate
when you get inside there.
Should we just go to this little like
patch of green here? Or do you want to
go across the bridge? I'm happy to do
either one.
Can we stand up on this?
>> I don't think so. I don't I don't think
there's any problem with
>> Parkour!
>> So, David, we just scaled the wall and
now we're sitting on a patch of grass
behind the Lincoln Memorial and we've
picked an incredible moment to have a
conversation about the arch. Let me
explain why. There is currently a
protest, a group of people marching
against the arch. They have handwritten
signs saying no arch.
>> a tuba, there's a band in there.
>> There are people beeping and
that
volume is on top of all the traffic and
the planes going overhead. So, just
explain to us as we're looking
down at the Arlington Memorial Bridge,
how the arch is going to fit into the
view that we're taking in right now, and
what you've learned about the process
behind the arch so far.
>> Well, what we're looking at now across
the other end of the bridge is a green
hillside in Virginia that belongs to
Arlington National Cemetery. Instead,
with the arches completed, you will see
a very large 250 ft tall, that's 25
story tall triumphal arch, which is a
little bit like the Arc de Triomphe in
Paris, but bigger, and it will have
golden statues. I believe they'll be
angels and eagles. It'll be a really
large arch dominating this view.
>> It's got to be the biggest new
construction in this kind of official
stretch of Washington in decades.
>> That's right. It will be something on
the scale of or bigger than the Lincoln
Memorial. We haven't built anything that
large as a monument on the mall in, as
you said, decades.
>> And how has the president gotten the
arch to this point, and how emblematic
is it of what we just saw at Lafayette
and with the reflecting pool?
>> Well, there hasn't been any contracts
assigned yet, so we don't know if
there's going to be no-bid contracts or
not, but it is of a similar vein in that
he is trying as much as he can to avoid
or bypass outside oversight. [music] So,
even to Congress. So, there's been a
he's made the point to Congress that
normally they would have to approve
something this large in Washington's
monumental core, but he said they don't
need to because 100 years ago another
Congress approved a sort of
similar-sounding project that was never
built, and so it already has
congressional approval.
>> creative.
>> Yes, it is similar to the other projects
in that they are going as fast as they
can to build something as big as they
can.
>> And what kind of opposition has or
hasn't it aroused [music] besides the
honking horns here on the road?
>> a lot of people in Washington are
unhappy about it. There have been some
lawsuits filed. There are people who
would like to stop this in its tracks.
A group of veterans have sued saying
that this disrupts the view of Arlington
Cemetery, but none of them have
succeeded so far.
There have been some incremental changes
as a result of some of the review boards
that have considered it. It's gotten
slightly shorter. I believe some of the
lions have come off, but the fundamental
shape of it is still for now the same.
The noise we're hearing from the planes
is a reminder of one of the big hurdles
laying in front of it, which is actually
that it this is on the flight path, the
approach to Washington National Airport.
And there is a concern that the FAA
might block it because it will
be too much of a construction on air
traffic. So, there are some hurdles in
front of it, but I if I had to bet, I
would bet that it's going to be built.
>> Well, we talked before about sight
lines, and I do think it's worth just
spending a second on what this arch
would change
because there are some really specific
structures on the hill behind the
Arlington Memorial Bridge that
relate to the Civil War, right? Relate
back to the Lincoln Memorial and all
these
kind of reciprocal relationships between
the monuments of Washington.
>> Okay, so if you will indulge me as a
transplanted Washingtonian, I think this
is one of the most remarkable places in
Washington. So, we're standing here by
the Lincoln Memorial, a symbol of the
rebinding of North and South. So, what's
beyond us on the other side of the
bridge is Arlington House, which
belonged to Robert E. Lee. It was Robert
E. Lee's home before he left to become
the leader, the top general of the
Confederacy.
>> A bridge between the home of the man who
tried to tear the Union asunder and the
president who through great
determination made sure that the country
stayed whole.
>> Right. And the the graves of the folks
who died to win that war. And so, if
you're going to block that, right? If
you're going to put something in between
these two symbols of the greatest crisis
in American history and the
reconciliation that followed, you better
have a really good reason, right? It
better really mean something that you're
putting that there and blocking the view
of this incredible piece of American
history that's just right across the
river from Washington.
>> and what is the reason why the the
wants to put this arch here at this
moment and as best I can tell and Times
3D renderings does show this, it
substantially does change the view
especially from Arlington House from
Arlington Cemetery back towards the
Lincoln Memorial.
>> My reading of it is that he wants an
arch. He's talked about how all great
cities have arches, London, Paris, Rome,
and so Washington needs one and this is
the easiest place to put an arch because
it's a big empty lawn
around which traffic flows.
>> What President Trump says this arch is
meant to celebrate is all of us, the 250
years of American history. But it seems
in some ways to be more a monument to
President Trump and his importance in
American history. And to the degree that
there's any singular person or cause
associated with this arch, it's him.
>> Well, you know, it strikes me that any
change to the official
Washington infrastructure
makes people crazy.
And
I'm remembering the battle that preceded
the construction of the World War II
Memorial which we walked through on our
way to the reflecting pool.
It was the late 1990s. I was in high
school. There was a huge fight about
whether that memorial was going to muck
up the National Mall.
And
it got built
>> Yep.
>> despite that huge battle.
>> [music]
>> And now no one thinks twice about it.
You walk through it. It's just not that
big a deal and you
kind of can't imagine that there was
ever a big battle over it at all. And I
wonder if that's ultimately going to be
the case
>> [music]
>> with the arch. Yes, it's going to
deprive someone standing at the
Arlington House of a very specific view
back to the Lincoln Memorial. But is
that really such a big deal? And will
people walk under it, drive under it,
and ultimately not think that much about
or be grateful for the fact that there's
this bold, beautiful arch at the end of
the mall?
>> I think you are right that if it is
built within a few years everybody will
think of it as part of the scenery in
Washington. Nobody will walk by and say,
you know, it doesn't belong. It is the
same architectural style as the rest of
Washington. So, it will stand out for
its size, but not for its architecture.
The one thing that I think is different
from the other monuments that have
caused consternation in Washington over
the years, and I think of not just the
World War II Memorial, but the very
modernist Vietnam War Memorial before
that, is that those other monuments were
monuments to a group of people, people
who had sacrificed something. What's
slightly different about this is that
there's not like one set of people this
is designed to honor, or what set of
people who will come here and feel like,
yes, I have my place in Washington that
I didn't have before. It's it's either
totally abstract, or it's about Trump.
Okay, but, and this is a really big but,
if we look all around us, left, right,
front, back, there are monuments to
American presidents all around us.
We've talked about Lincoln. We've talked
about Washington. Over there to my left
is
Jefferson.
So, in that context, why shouldn't
President Trump
get what we kind of understand to be a
memorial to himself,
given how monumentally he has changed
American politics, American policy, how
the world thinks about America.
Well, traditionally, we have not let
presidents build their own memorials.
Traditionally, you have to leave office,
there has to be some sort of intervening
period in which Americans and American
history can judge your time in office
and decide whether you are worthy of
monumental tribute. Right, and have that
monument relate to the way we think of
you. Right, we don't give every
president There's not a Grover Cleveland
monument around here, right? We give
presidents that we decide are worthy of
emulation and adoration, we give them a
place here in Washington. And Trump has
decided to give himself that place,
effectively, and that is very emblematic
of who he's been, all the ways he's
discarded the so-called rules of
politics, but also the real rules of
Washington, and succeeded and put his
stamp on the country and the world.
>> [music]
>> So, in that way, having Trump build his
own memorial is very fitting. That said,
you can't seal your place in history and
trust that it will stay that way.
American history will still render some
judgment on Trump. You can't just build
a monument and forestall that. Uh but he
is certainly trying to make sure that he
can't be forgotten.
Oh David, thank you very much.
Thank you.
>> [music]
>> After we spoke with David, congressional
Democrats introduced legislation seeking
to block [music] construction of the
arch.
Their bill claims that the arch relies
on illegal use of public funds without
permission from Congress.
The bill, which is considered a long
shot,
>> [music]
>> is co-sponsored by Representative Don
Beyer of Northern Virginia, whose
district includes Arlington National
Cemetery,
and whose grandparents, parents, [music]
and sister are buried there.
>> This is one of our country's most
hallowed spaces.
>> In a video recorded [music] in front of
the cemetery,
Beyer described the arch as an act of
desecration.
>> Unfortunately, those of us who treasure
it are reckoning with a threat to the
peace of this sacred place and to the
honor and trust it represents. A
towering 250-ft vanity project that
would overshadow the resting place of
our heroes and hide it from the view of
visitors to the National Mall and
Lincoln [music] Memorial.
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know
[music] today.
The future of President Trump's
controversial $1.8 billion [music] fund
to compensate victims of government
weaponization is in growing doubt
[music]
after decisions on Friday from two
federal judges.
One judge temporarily [music] barred the
fund from being set up, while another
reopened a legal case involving Trump
and the IRS,
whose dismissal appeared to lead to the
fund's [music] creation.
At the same time, aides to the president
are increasingly urging him to get
[music] rid of the fund amid intense
blowback from both courts and from
Congress.
>> [music]
>> And
a cornerstone of the president's plan to
celebrate America's 250th anniversary, a
series of musical concerts on the
National Mall starting later [music]
this month, is collapsing.
Over the weekend, Trump called for the
music series to be canceled after at
least five of the nine performers
dropped out. Several of the singers
[music] said they had originally
believed the event would be
non-partisan, only to learn later on
that it was being planned [music] and
overseen by the president himself.
Today's [music] episode was produced by
Lexi Dio, Mo Zaidy, Diana Wynn, [music]
and Jack D'Isidoro.
It was edited by Rob Zipko with help
from Liz O'Brien
and contains [music] music by Marion
Lozano, Roni Misto, Dan Powell, Brad
Fisher, [music] and Leah Shaw Dameron.
Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Afi
Shapiro and Alyssa Moxley.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.